Serious challenges, questionable names, and determination. There’s something that these three phrases have in common. Food challenges. Those who do them certainly have determination. It’s a challenge, after all. There’s another phrase that links to these words – speedrunning. Contrary to autocorrect, this is one word. Speedrunning isn’t that well known of a hobby, which is rather surprising, since it is an incredibly awe-inspiring thing to watch.

But before I get ahead of myself here, I should probably explain what this is. It is not, as my dad thought, just running fast. We’ve got sprinting for that. No, at heart, it's just doing anything as fast as you can with a timer. If you’ve got a timer, you could call reloading your toilet paper, a speedrun. The term, speedrunning, is usually attributed to games, as this is the area where it first came up. The allure of speedrunning is the same as the Guinness Book of Records. To set a record. To have that title. Nowadays, surprisingly, Guinness does see speedrunning as a valid way of getting world records.

Just a disclaimer, though. Speedrunning is hard. It requires unimaginable amounts of determination and patience. Tricks and skills help you perform certain bits faster than others. People spend months and years on just trying to improve their time. Milliseconds are important. One millisecond too slow and you might just lose the chance of being the world record holder. 

Game developers will advertise “This game has over 20 hours of gameplay.” But the sad and brutal truth is, in most categories, speedrunning can stretch the human limit and get 20 hours to just under an hour in some cases. The exact times vary for each category and game. For example, Any% is usually the most popular category for most games with its only requirement being beating the game as fast as possible. You don’t have to do the full game. Max% (or sometimes called 100%) involves beating the game as fast as possible, while getting every single item in the game. The opposite of this is Low% which requires you to beat the game as fast as possible while collecting the lowest number of items. This ends up in a run, which is more like a snail race than anything else. For Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess, the Low% run stands at 24 hours, 59 mins, and 52 seconds. Certainly not anything speedy.

Glitches are a staple of speedrunning. These can range from simple infinite stamina to arbitrary code execution – the most powerful glitch in any game (this allowed SethBling to complete Super Mario World in just under 6 minutes). A glitch is a minor malfunction in the code, but the meaning of minor can stretch quite far. Item Sliding, Cappy Return Cancel, Walking Through Walls, Pie Ray, Menu Drop. These are all examples of glitches from many different games used in speedrunning games quickly. Item sliding uses items to gain way too much speed, essentially allowing the player to swim from island to island in mere seconds if they have the correct aim. Cappy Return Cancel, or CRC for short is a near frame perfect glitch that allows Cappy from Super Mario Odessey to teleport. Mathematically, (when finding explanations for glitches, mathematics and physics is usually used) the rule is described by the following vector formula, where   is Mario's position,   is Cappy's original position before the CRC,   is Cappy's new position after the CRC, and   is a unit vector representing the direction Mario is facing. It’s mainly used in the Minimum Captures category for SMO. Walking Through Walls allows Mario to glitch themselves into a wall and walk through to a different section. Pie Ray is used in Minecraft to see through blocks using the inbuilt Pie Chart for a special menu. It’s not technically a glitch as it already exists in the F3 menu, but settings need to be changed for it be useful. It’s more of a tactic. In combination with good luck, great skill and other glitches, the record for Minecraft Java Edition Any% Glitchless Random-Seed 1.16+ (God, that’s long) stands at a shocking 11 minutes 9 seconds and 667 milliseconds. Finally, Menu Drop is a glitch activated at the beginning of the Hollow Knight to allow you to drop quickly from large heights by accessing the inventory in the air, which shouldn’t be possible as the inventory is only supposed to be accessed when the player is a controllable mode, standing on the floor.

Some glitches aren't so simple, though. Just to perform one glitch in a full run can take an exceptionally long time. The incorrect execution can lead to a full system crash or just a simple run restart. The run restart will be easier in the beginning, but for some, 3000 hours of practice to just keep coming to a restart because of one glitch can be disheartening. So much so, that they quit games altogether. Mistakes just keep happening. But what if you wanted to know what the theoretical limit is, without all the mistakes?

If you have watched speedruns before, TAS is probably an acronym you’ve come across in the past. It stands for Tool-Assisted Speedrun. These aren’t meant to compare with human runs, but just to prove what a ‘mistake-less’ run would look like. They would also include glitches too precise to be performed by humans in real runs. These are still performed by a human, but on an emulator. This allows for tools like frame advance (which allows the game to be played each frame at a time) to be used. This helps precise inputs to be entered at precise moments to get a near perfect run. Supplying inhuman looks to those watching these impressive feats.
It can take many weeks to be able to replicate a TAS run, but with enough practice, one can take the title of world record. Even then, you’re not finished. Maybe your record will stand for a long time, or maybe, someone else will try to take it. That’s why, even after getting the record, you must keep pushing, keep going. Your title could be gone in an instant by new routes or techniques, or simply more optimized movement and execution. That’s why speedrunners are just as amazing as speedcubers or trick shots. At heart, it’s all about practice and patience.

However, good things will always have a pinch of salt with them. Cheating is quite a big box of salt, and moderators try extremely hard to stop any cheated videos from leaking into the record stream. Analyzing the audio in a spectrogram to see if there are any breaks, checking probability, validating integrity of game files. These are all part of a speedrun moderator’s job. It’s like airport security. There are many layers of checking to stop illegal items from getting through. Nonetheless, some still get through. For example, in Trackmania, Riolu, a top player, was found to have cheated thousands of his records, even though he can prove his worth.
If you would like to speedrun video games and show them, the best place is Speedrun.com. Rules depend on category to category, but video proof must be shown with a timer. Cheating is not tolerated of course. Otherwise, feel free to run and submit! Thank you!